Q. Good morning. I chose the B section. The reason being last time when I did ML, I had chosen B section and I found it to be good last to last year. So, I thought this time also I will choose B and take a chance and that is how I have come here. Having said that now you all know that I will be teaching machine learning course for you. You have to settle down quickly. One protocol we have to follow. The moment I start you have to be silent. You cannot be doing your own work and that I just want speaking. Are you done with all your jokes? Are you ready? You finish eating? Are you done? Shall I start? I am seeking your permission. Are you done? Are you still have some jokes? So, I will be teaching machine learning course for you this semester as you have already received your timetable and this Monday I missed it out. Sorry about this. I had to attend a family function. So, I was not here and I am given to understand that Dr. Sirabhi came here and gave introduction to the session. But, I again I will be doing little bit of introduction to machine learning before I start the first machine learning algorithm. If time permits, I will start that otherwise I will not be able to do that. But, I hope when I just inquired with her, she said that machine learning types have not been covered. Is my understanding correct? Supervised, unsupervised, reinforcement all these have not been covered. Is that correct? She gave an introduction in terms of applications and so on. So, that is what has been covered. So, I will give some introduction to machine learning and then we will start with the actual machine learning algorithm. So, let me begin. Today, I will give you the introduction followed by the ML algorithm. I want you to understand where this actually sits in the computing realm. So, that understanding you should have. You do not belong to this section. I should wait for you. Gen Z, I have to do all this. Suppose, if I ask you to write a small C function to find the square of a given number, how would you write? I do not want the main, just the function. I do not want the square of a number function. It should receive a parameter. I am writing pseudo code. I am writing pseudo code. I am not writing the C. Otherwise, I should write in text and all of that. I am not writing that. It should return. If you want, you can write it in type or data type, you can write. Then, what should be the? 2 years. Yes, return x into a. But, I deliberately chose an Y. This is how you will write it. If I want to square a number, the input is x. Most of the statements are C statements. Let me make it as C and convert. C proper C function now. Is this right? Everyone agrees to this. Now, if I want to find this, the function is known to you. Given any input variable x value, you will be able to find out the value of Y. Correct? You all agree. Now, I will pass on from the main. I will say square sum, square number. I will say 5. The answer will be returned in some k variable. Let us say k will get the value of 25. So, what is happening in this program? You are passing some number 5 input. If you look at this function, you are getting an input, you are getting an output. Very deterministic function is not it. The value of x is given, which is 5 and the output from that function is 25. You are giving, let us say 7. The output is 49. It is all very well known, well determined. Is that clear? Instead of this, this is a deterministic function. You have an output. That is it. But, if you instead of this, suppose I give you this. I have taken only few samples. Instead of this, I am giving you this. Mic is not on. You are listening to me on this. How did you get to know? You cannot hear. Slowly I will raise my voice. Can you hear me now? So, you have the x and you have the y. And this is what I have given you. Now, how do you find out the new input x, which is let us say, which is 8. What is the value of y? I am just giving you this. How did you compute? So, he is saying it is approximately 64. He is saying that, which means that he processed something from the given data. What did he do? Or everybody has done it? What did you do? So, you understood the pattern. You understood the relationship between x and y. Did you understand? And from your processing, from your brain, from the brain computing, you understood the pattern to be y is equal to approximately x square. This you arrived at. You found out the relationship between x and y is like this, from the given data, from the given experience. This is what you unearthed from the given data. And this is known as what? What is this? And what is this? This is called as experience or the data. From the data, you are trying to identify the relationship between the output and the input, which you identified, which you unearthed. And that you did by looking at the data one by one. That processing you did it at using your brain right now. It was internal and you found out this. After finding out this from the given data, you are trying to plug x now into this and you are saying the answer is 64. So, what is this data? This is known as inference data, inference data or the test data. This is you are trailing the brain and that is why it is called as the training data. You are training the brain to understand the relationship between y and x. And after sufficient training of your brain, you understood the output from your brain turned out to be this. And again you use the brain power to this retention and applied x to this and you found out y. This is inference time. You might have been hearing about model and model and model, ML models, ML models right. By now, you might have worked with some models right. So, what is that model? This is the model. Is that clear? Understanding the relationship between the input and output and unirthing the equation that governs the input and output is ML model. That is coming out as an output which was known straightforward in an algorithmic approach. Here we knew the model directly. So, I wrote an algorithmic approach. This is traditional programming because I knew this relationship. But in the absence of not doing that relationship, in real life scenarios, this kind of relationship will not be that easily known. This is still a very simple equation, y equal to x square is still a very simple equation. But in reality, the number of features, see some of your expressions, you are trying to test me, do not test me, it is okay. I know you just listen to the subject. With proper intent, you listen to the subject. I know the subject. I can claim that I know the subject pretty well. You do not have to test me, what I am doing and all that. Your expressions, let it be genuine. x 1 to x 100 is the set of features. If I of course, I may make some mistakes while teaching so that you can always correct it because you are all intelligent and I have already put the disclaimer. You are all intelligent, I agree to this factor. No problem. x 1 to x 100 is the feature set. Instead of just 1 x, you have the input itself is not just 1 x, there are so many variables. x 1 to x 100 and so many permutations and combinations. And you have the y. Is it that easy to find out the relationship? It is not such a straightforward thing to be saying that it is y equal to x square like this. So, this may be something like this. y is equal to x 1 square plus x 1 x 2 plus x 100 square something like this. The equation that governs the input and output would be something like that. The model is so complex, you understand and to understand this kind of equation and relationship between the input and output, how many samples you should look at? How much training should happen? For it to perform at a later time, it is something like this. I will teach you a machine learning. I am assuming and I am giving you confidence that I will teach damn well. You will get trained damn well, but in the examination something else happens. The training can happen, the damn well we have to put question mark there. What is the meaning of damn well? Do you understand how many times have to keep repeating the same thing for you to understand what it is? How many examples that I should cover in the class for me to say that I am going to cover it damn well? And how many times how often you should study this for you to say that your damn well trained and then we will test it actually in the examination and you still get a secret. That is inference time. Inference time and see you understand that is called as later in ML very often we will see this over-pitting. All examination papers I have solved. Like the way you prepare for your examination, second-use examination, but still your CET scores are like that. Why did it happen? You were so very well trained learning one tuition, night one tuition, that tuition, this tuition. There is so much of training that has happened, but at the time of testing something else happens because the questions are very unseen kind and your performance is measured at that time, not during the training time. You understand this is called as over-pitting because you are so confident that you have solved all the papers and you have got trained so very well, which so much confidence you are going to the examination hall which is good, but examination hall gives you lot of surprises and that is when all your training goes for a toss. You understand the concept is called as over-pitting in machine learning terms is that clear as simple as that. So here to understand the relationship between these two, how many samples or how much training has to happen? Look at the number of features, how many variations are there and who will learn that relationship complex? I mean I expose you to some five-sit throws and a simple equation you were able to process it in brain, but if you have lacks of rows like this of experience and you have hundred features, is it that easy to derive an equation of that kind is the question by you just looking at it. It is usually humanly very difficult and in fact that is what your machine learning algorithms are trying to do is that clear. So your machine learning algorithm is called as a meta learning algorithm machine learning algorithm is a meta learning algorithm. What is the meaning? What you are giving to the ML algorithm? Your experience is that clear is that clear and what the ML algorithm is expected to produce as an output this model and how are you going to use this model? You will give the test data, new test data x and it will produce the y. This is your program which I wrote there, the traditional programming is derived as an output from ML. I am trying to tell you this machine learning algorithm is a meta algorithm to produce this model algorithm. There are two programs here which you need to understand. This program I wrote there that is why I started with the traditional programming. There I knew the relationship between x and y beforehand, but here I am trying to find that. Do you understand? I am trying to find out the relationship between x and y by giving x y and what is the role of this algorithm? ML algorithm? It is algorithm s role, this algorithm s role is to produce that algorithm. Do you get what I am saying? The algorithm s role here, this meta algorithm s role is to produce this algorithm and actually I will use it for prediction. Do you understand? Now I am emphasizing and my voice has raised. Did you understand where the ML algorithm fits? Do you understand? So, that is what we mean by a model. What we are learning is a model which is also a program kind. You can have a program for that. How to represent a model? It can be like a program. It can be in the form of a mathematical expression. If you have heard of neural networks, the model is in a form of weights, billion parameters are deputy everybody is using 176 billion parameters. What is that? It is the model. Model is it represented in this form? No. The model is represented in the form of weight matrix like this. This is a weight matrix. If you are talking about a neural network, the model learning is outputted in the form of a matrix. The representation of the model, the representation of the model can be in this form, can be in this form, it can be in this form or it can be in the form of disjunction of conjunction, rules, all of this. There can be different ways of representing the machine learning models. But what is the model? Model is the learning that we have had from the experience. Did you understand where this fits in? One other aspect that we need to understand about the course is about the quadrant in which we are operating. Tom Michell, right now it is not in the syllabus, I am just not going to dwell into lot of details. Thinking humanly, acting humanly, acting humanly, thinking rationally, acting rationally. To make the machine intelligent, there are four quadrants. We are in the realm of artificial intelligence. I hope you understand that. Where does ML fit? What is artificial intelligence? This distinction you should have. When do you say an algorithm or machine as intelligent? So, lot of discussions should have happened around this, but right now I am skipping all that because it is not part of the syllabus. There we have to discuss these four quadrants. Thinking humanly, acting humanly, thinking rationally, acting rationally. So, here the lot of cognitive science involves, biology involves, mathematics involves, theorem proving involved. There are so many things and each of these topics that I am talking about, social science and there are so many things that are involved in making the machine intelligent. So, which cognitive science, which category it may fit in? Maybe thinking rationally, thinking humanly, cognitive science domain fits in that. Cognitive science, neural science, brain computer interface. So, there are many subjects which we can study to make the machine intelligent. One other example I will give you. You have a washing machine and it is intelligent to affect that it will take the input as dirty clothes and outputs the cleaned clothes. So, I would put the washing machine under acting rationally. It is not acting humanly. The reason is the way we wash, we just put our hand like this and then put it on a stone and we wash it. That is acting humanly. How do we clean our clothes? It is a different process, but washing machine does not do it exactly the same way. It also spins and all of that is there. Table top, all types are there. Side top and all side wise. There are so many different ways in which the washing machines come, but they do not exactly do the way we do it. There are some things which may be similar, but not exactly the same we do not have a stone. We use the cloth in some manner and all of that. That is not the washing machine cleans, but it cleans. It is intelligent to that extent. So, if the washing machine was cleaning it in the same way as the human being clean the cloth, it would have come under the realm of acting humanly. But it is acting rationally. As long as it does the task, I am okay. I am not really worried about how it does. That is why it is called as acting rationally. So, why I am trying to emphasize this? Here is that our machine learning course is in this realm only. We are only looking at this. We are not touching any of this. We are not looking at making the machine intelligent, artificially intelligent in any other realm. We are only looking at making the machine do a task for me. However, it does. It need not do the same way as the human, but I want to make the machine intelligent. That is it. Let it do a task for me. So, it is acting rationally in any other realm. That is how the machine is made intelligent. So, machine is made intelligent, artificial intelligence using which method using machine learning. You can make the machine intelligent in many different ways. And artificial intelligence which realm I am talking about this one. I hope you got the setting of what we are going to teach in the ML and what we are not. There are many things we are not actually touching upon. So, you cannot claim that I know everything about AI. Do you understand? Everybody thinks that if we know ML, we know AI, but that is not true. There are many other domains that we are need to look at. There are many different ways in which we can make the machine intelligent. We are not looking at it. We are looking at only one way of making the machine intelligent, which is the machine learning way of making it intelligent. In fact, the earlier time this course was called as machine intelligence instead of machine learning. We had mixed artificial intelligence and machine learning and we had called the course as machine intelligence. But then people suggested that everybody knows by the name machine learning. So, just going by the market, we again renamed it as machine learning. Otherwise, this course was called as machine intelligence earlier. Is that clear? So, machine learning is the way in which I am making the machine intelligent and that way is acting rationally. As long as it meets my requirements, I am fine. How I do it? Is it same way as my brain thinks all this? You do not have to worry. Whether humanly also thinks that way right now, I am not really worried about it. I am not looking at neuroscience here. That part I am not even touching brain computer interface. I am not touching cognitive science. I am not looking at it. Psychology I am not looking at it. So, these are not at all looked at in making the machine intelligent. Is this clear? So, ML way of making machine intelligent. The ML way is here. Now, I am connecting it here. This is ML way. So, ML way of making it intelligent means, ML will figure out what is that intelligence. So, it will output a model. Once this intelligence is known to me, then I am done. Is that clear? So, ML algorithms actually produce a program. Do you understand? So, that is why this is called as Metaprogram. Program producing another program and that we usually term it as model and that model can be represented in different forms. That depends on the ML algorithm itself. I will be teaching a concept called as concept learning. Concept learning produces something called as a generalized hypothesis. That is a form in which the intelligence is produced. In the case of decision trees, which is the next algorithm, it produces disjunction of conjunction rules as a top rules. Then we will be studying K nearest neighbors is kind of machine learning not machine learning kind. So, that is a different game altogether. And then you have logistic regression produces another hypothesis function, which produces a parameters. It will be in this form, equation form logistic regression. Then we have neural networks. It is in this form. Support vector machine again it will be in this form. So, every machine learning algorithm has its own way of learning and producing the output. That is what we are looking at it. My experience is the same data. I have the data, I have the experience. I am presenting that experience to you to whom I am presenting. I am presenting it to a neural network. I am a presented to a support vector machine. This is what is your syllabus I am talking about. I am a presented to a hidden Markov model. I am a presented to a K means clustering algorithm. I am a presented to logistic regression. And based on the machine learning algorithm that I choose, they all learn from the experience. But the way they output the model would be different. And that is what constitutes our course. We are going to study this heavily, this part. And to understand how they produce output. Do you have any questions? Is the concept clear? Is the setting clear? What we are going to study in this course? Is this clear? Generally, I do not prefer using slides. I somehow do not like it. But for some cases, I may have to use. So, what I tend to do is see if you are comfortable. I teach like this and then I will run the slides once and show it to you. So, that slide and my content should be matching. So, that is what I do it. One or two times I will do it. If you are comfortable, if you want me to project the slide and teach, that is also fine. I am not a slides person. So, now machine learning, one of the definitions as per the textbook Tom Michel, the other definition I will read out later is called a SPE model. The machine learning is defined using PETE, performance, task and experience. A machine learning algorithm, machine learning algorithm should concentrate on PETE. Suppose, the machine learning algorithm task is to categorize between dog and cat. So, the task is, what is the task in this case? The task is to categorize between dog and cat. It is categorization. So, this is about categorization. I am giving an example. Categorization between dog and cat. Now, if this task has to be learnt by the machine learning algorithm, what should be the kind of experience that you should give? Visual, can you be more specific? Images. Images of cats and dogs and that is it. Human beings, you will not give. We will make an assumption. We will give only dogs and cats and we will not give anything. We will make an assumption. You will give everything and no assumptions and you expect m l algorithm to find out that then how many categories should be there? If everything else you are giving, everything on earth you are giving, there should be three categorizations. One for the dog, one for the cat and one for others. That is possibility. If you are assuming that you are going to give only dog and cat, these two you give two outputs. That depends on what you want to do. So, based on that the experience should be provided. So, what constitutes your experience? A set of images. What constitutes experiences? A set of images. And what the m l algorithm task is to figure out a model which is capable of distinguishing between the cat and dog. The task at hand is to categorize. M l algorithm should learn to categorize. That model has to be outputted and once the model is outputted then it will be able to categorize. Is that clear? So, normally we write the output of categorization here itself because the model m l algorithm, all these are embedded here. I wrote it separately there. But everything is inside. M l algorithm, let us say neural network and the model learning is inside. That is the reason why I am giving the experience and the output is indicated here. It is all embedded. Metal algorithm and the model is inside. What do you think about the performance? The parameter p. That is the task and that is learning. What do you think about the performance? Accuracy. Let us say I give 1000 images and in this 500 or dogs and 500 or cats. And if the m l algorithms output is saying that there are only two dog images and 800 or whatever, 998 or cats. What do you think about the m l algorithms learning? I know about my experience. My experience is 500 dogs and I am giving 500 cats I am giving. But output is not saying that way. This is known to me. So, what do you think about the performance? Two out of 1000 are correct. What about accuracy? It is gone. So, what you should do? In prud, learning is bad. Learning is bad. I am showing you 1000 images. You are saying among the 1000 images and I know I am giving you 500 or dogs and 500 or cats. I know that. But you are saying only two or cats and rest of them are all dogs. If you are saying like that, it is wrong. That means your brain is not processing properly. It has not learned properly. If it has not learned properly, what we should do? Again, we have to train. Do something. You may want to give more data or you want to iterate. Again, I will tell you look at carefully, look at the nose. Something like that, I will say. Look at the hair, look at the eyes. I will ask you to look through more details and then I will say, okay, learn it better. So, next time it will say, okay, some 300 or dogs and 700 or cats. So, it is a slight better improvement, isn't it? So, like this, it has to keep learning. Let us say we reach about 85 percent. What does that mean? 85 percent accuracy. What does this mean? 85 times 85 percent of the images among the 1000 are understood properly by the ML algorithm. It learned. Probably, it learned about eyes. We do not know what it learned. It is a black box. Till today, no one knows why chargeivity works the way it works. They understand, but it works. That is called we know. It works we know. How it is trained? We know. But what magic happens? That is a black box. They understand. So, machine learning algorithm probably is trying to understand the curvatures of the eyes, nose, lips, all of this hair, hair color. There are so many things that it is probably trying to understand. It is improving over time, over iterations and then it gave me 85 percent accuracy. 15 percent of the time it did not give correctly. That is what is happening here to your grades also. SABC, why is it coming? The same thing, right? Your training was to only that extent. You did not learn some things correctly, so you were not able to answer. It is the same thing. So, you got this accuracy. This is clear 85 percent accuracy. So, performance. So, what performance you would like to have is 85 percent good enough accuracy? What do you have to say? Depends on the data is only that much. I am getting only 85 percent. Complexity, whatever it has learnt is that said. But is 85 percent accuracy acceptable? The one thing that I am deciding after doing this introduction class, this B section is not the same as my 2 years back B section. That much is for sure. I am not getting any proper response, especially from the last ventures. So, I think I should shift the section. I will change the section. It is better. There is absolutely no expression of happiness, no interest in your faces. By the way, my PhD topic was on face recognition. And I have done some projects on facial expressions also. All your expressions are, yā kata yal tarapayuro, machine learning it or anything. For people who understand Canada, they understand what I am saying. Kābhakwas karayabo, machine learning model bholter here. This is how your expressions are. I am telling you. So, if your expressions are like this, I know how to see this, the content. It is the M is a machine learning. There are PTE model look at this, this is. There are three types. Supervis, I am surprised everybody on earth knows that. Do you understand? I will tell you many people have done machine learning introduction, but did you understand it this way? You honestly tell me. Then that is what I am saying. We have to understand what elements we are bringing in. You may think that you have done great internships in all centers and industries. You have done LLMs, you have done Chargipitis, you have done Open LLMs, that does not mean anything in my cloth. I am telling you. See, you are a Bhau Parak Markovak Naman Nauiga first. Otherwise, you will not listen to me. I am assuring you that I will bring another element which you will not know. Otherwise, why should you have the formal course like this? You have done all the projects. You might have done some projects, you might have categorized, you might have worked on cloud also. You might be on cloud 9 also. But there are many other elements which you need to understand. From mathematics angle, you should understand machine learning which you have not done. I am telling you, you have a very weak foundation on mathematics as far as machine learning is concerned. And that is what this course highlights on complete derivations. It is a heavy math course. Please understand machine learning algorithm does not mean it is only algorithm. I am going to derive equations. You have to understand what is gradient descent to understand that it is a big deal. Not knowing, just knowing neural network uses gradient descent does not mean anything. You have to understand something called as directional derivatives, partial derivatives which you have studied in PUC, you should know. Do you understand all of that is important. If you have a solid foundation in machine learning, charge if it is nothing, you understand. I will teach about transformers also later if you want. But that is a different domain. So show some interest, enthusiasm, I will not move on to the new muskrat or the taktalanan guy. Who is no energy at all? Absolutely no energy. You have to know that this is not the expression that you should show. I do not get any interest, enthusiasm to teach here. I hope I get better responses from your end so that I can make an impactful teaching here. So let us continue. So like this I will be digressing in between, just to make sure that you are awake. So, when I digress I will forget what I was teaching. Performance task and experience is the way machine learning model will have to be defined. Machine learning definition goes in the form of performance task and experience. Now the question is how are you going to present this experience to the machine learning model. The performance, the experience that you present can be in the form of x and y. What do we mean by that? The experience that you provide can be in the form of x and y. What does that mean? I know the input as well as I know the output. You have blood samples collected. You have the complete blood count. Everything is available. You also know whether the person is diabetic or not diabetic. Why? Why is also known? Blood report is also available. So, x is known, y is known. That kind of experience when you provide, machine learning algorithm, you are giving 2.2 as input and output is 1. Machine learning algorithm, you are giving 2.2, the output has come out as 0.8. Is it correct or not correct? Yes, it is not exactly correct. I am exactly talking about the output. We expected an output of 1, but we got an output of 0.8. This is the probability number. The output will be in the range of 0 to 1. So, I got 0.8. So, there is an error. Are you okay with this error? Are you not okay with this? 1 minus 0.8 is the error. Is the error? So, based on the amount of error, you will have to do the changes here. It is not drastic or random change, based on the amount of error. That is what we call as back propagation in artificial neural network. Back propagate that error. To make sure that you adjust only that much, you have to tweak only that much. And it will learn again. Next time when we adjust, surprisingly it makes you 0.7. When we adjust, not that we adjust and we get a nice one. So, then whatever we did was wrong. Again adjust, adjust and adjust and adjust and how long? Maybe I will stop it 0.88. I am okay. I have tried many things. I am fine with 0.8 and I have stopped. This is for one sample. But do you want to see, accumulate the error for all samples and then check? Do you want to accumulate the error? Or do you want to check the error for every sample and then back propagate? Or do you want to do it for 50 samples and then accumulate the error and back propagate? That is where we have concepts like gradient descent, stochastic gradient descent, mini-bath gradient descent. When how do you want to find out the error, when do you want to find out the error and how much you want to tweak? There there are some changes that will study in detail in artificial neural network. This is clear. But you have to tweak. We are not happy. We have to tweak. Tweak, tweak, tweak, we may not still be happy. That is a different matter. ML will never be happy. If it is a financial institution, I left it at that performance. Yes, now I remember. Performance. If 85 percent is it good enough? See, if it is a bank transaction, financial related company, FinTech companies, they cannot accept even 99.99 percent accuracy. It has to be 100 percent. Do you understand? You cannot go to FinTech company and say, my machine learning algorithm is 95 percent accuracy. With proudness, you cannot say like that. They will ask you, where is that 5 percent? You understand 95 percent, forget. What is the 5 percent? I in fact ask my teachers also about the feedback student feedback, which you actually carelessly give. When you give a feedback percentage to student teachers at the end of the semester, because you are in a hurry to get your hearticates, you are not worried about really giving proper feedback to teachers. But that is going to be evaluated later on. When somebody comes and they will very happily say it, you may call me sadist, but I am just saying, I got 92 percent, like that they will happily say. I will say congratulations is very good and all that. But please work on the 8 percent. This is always there. That remaining 8 percent is the question mark. So, same way here for a FinTech company and also let us say I work done 100 images in face recognition and 100 images, I am getting 98 percent accuracy. I am not disclosing that I work done 100 images, but I am only telling you I got 98 percent accuracy. How does it feel? Wow, so nice which algorithm you have must be very brainy and all of that. Then I will tell you I have worked on 100 images. Then on the same algorithm, I put 1 lakh images. On the same algorithm, I put 1 lakh images. What is the accuracy? It has dropped to 50 percent. What happened to your 98 percent then? So, in an absolute terms if you say 98 percent and all that is no meaning, they understand. So, these are things that you should understand. You are carried away by your experimentation in your earlier semesters. That is why I am trying to caution you. It is good that you have done some experimentation in your earlier semesters or in your earlier whatever strength that you had with any company or anything that is all good. But you have to understand it from the foundation point of view. Do you understand what exactly this means? What is the implication of it? So, these are certain things which you should be very cautious about. So, if you give x and y at least I have an information to know whether my machine learning algorithm has learnt or not. That information is available. This is called as supervised setting because this output is available to you. This is called a supervised learning. I am learning under a supervision of y. Supervised learning. But when we ask students what is supervised learning? They will say it has like very general social size with the teacher we learn like that. But you have to be very specific. When you are talking about machine learning you should say y is available. This output is available.